hiv benchmarking: input files & notebooks (#3)
Reed-CompBio/spras-benchmarking: hiv-benchmarking/README.md

## HIV benchmarking

> This folder contains raw data, processed data, and SPRAS results pertaining to the dataset taken from the following research article: **HIV-1 virological synapse formation enhances infection spread by dysregulating Aurora Kinase B** - Bruce JW, Park E, Magnano C, Horswill M, Richards A, Potts G, et al. (2023)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This folder contains raw data, processed data, and SPRAS results pertaining to the dataset taken from the following research article: **[HIV-1 virological synapse formation enhances infection spread by dysregulating Aurora Kinase B](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1011492)** - Bruce JW, Park E, Magnano C, Horswill M, Richards A, Potts G, et al. (2023)
```

> The data is about human immune cells responding to viral infection and contains data from protein abundance and phosphorylation changes experiments, which will be the input to pathway reconstruction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The study examines human immune cells responding to viral infection as well as the changes that take place inside the already infected cells, which is the focus here.
The data is from protein abundance and phosphorylation experiments, which will be the input to pathway reconstruction.
```

We should also describe the two time points because that will be important for understanding the 5 and 60 file names.

    - Modification: Remove the -N suffix to retain only the majorIdentifier.
    - Prize Selection: Retain the maximum prize number associated with each major protein identifier.
- Protein Mapping:
    - Network file used: `hiv_raw_data/phosphosite-irefindex13.0-uniprot.txt`
    - Issue: Node file and network file use different protein codes.
    - Solution: Map and replace protein identifiers in the node file to match the network file using UniProt database. The mapping file used was `hiv_raw_data/idmapping_2024_06_26.tsv`, which was downloaded from UniProt. To get the most recent UniProt mapping, run `generate_protein_mapping_input.ipynb`, upload that to Uniprot, and then use the resulting `idmapping`.
- Column Header Update:
    - Original Headers: UniProtID and prize
    - New Headers: NODEID and prize
- These modified files are saved as `hiv_processed_data/modified_prize_xx.csv`

#### 4. filter_empty_pathways.ipynb
- Removes any empty pathways that were created from the SPRAS output in place
- Recommended: make a copy of the directory and then execute code on duplicate directory 

#### 5. plot_num_nodes_summary_table.ipynb

> - using the `xx-pathway-summary.txt` file, this notebook produces histograms for the number of nodes present in all the pathways combined

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- using the `XXX-pathway-summary.txt` file, this notebook produces histograms for the number of nodes present in all the pathways combined
```

>     - i.e. Number of Nodes vs. Count, where count represents the number of total pathways that have a particular number of nodes in their pathway

Reviewer 2: what do you mean by total pathways?

Author: The total number of pathways that have a certain number of nodes

- To remove the 1-to-many mapping and produce a 1-to-1 mapping instead, API calls to [genome.jp](genome.jp) are done again to filter out UniProt IDs that *don't* have SwissProt IDs i.e. protein IDs that haven't been 'manually reviewed'.
- All these mappings are saved locally as csvs.

#### 7. hiv05_comparison_ratios
This notebook contains code to create comparison ratios for SPRAS ensemble pathways vs. the original publication pathway *and* SPRAS ensemble pathways vs. the KEGG pathway 
- This is done by intersecting the nodes found in both pathways, and then comparing the number of nodes found in both to the number of nodes found in the individual original pathways

#### 8. ensemble_node_maxfreq.ipynb
This notebook contains code that loads the ensemble pathway and assigns the highest frequency associated with each node to the respective node.
- The original SPRAS output ensemble pathway file assigns frequencies to edges. 
- The result produced by this notebook assigns the maximum edge frequency associated with each node to the node, creating a max node frequency list that is saved as a CSV.

#### 9. build_prc_kegg_hiv05.ipynb

> This notebook produces a precision recall curve using `scikitlearn`. This is done through the following steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This notebook produces a precision recall curve using `scikit-learn`. This is done through the following steps:
```

- Building the PRC uses the max node frequency produced from the ensemble pathway, and the KEGG to Swissprot/Uniprot mapping.
- A vector of 0s and 1s is built that indicates whether the particular protein in the ensemble pathway is found in the KEGG pathway or not. This vector is called `y_kegg` and is attached to the ensemble pathway dataframe.
    - The `max_freq` column in the dataframe is considered as the probabilities/scores and the `y_kegg` column in the dataframe is considered as the true label
- Then, a precision recall curve is built.

#### 10. build_prc_gene-ontology_hiv05_hiv060

> This notebook also produces several precision recall curves using `scikitlearn`. These are done from selecting 3 biological processes from the publication's list of observed biological processes and then taking the Uniprot list of all Gene Ontology proteins (for the human taxonomy) for that particular biological process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This notebook also produces several precision recall curves using `scikit-learn`. These are done from selecting 3 biological processes from the publication's list of observed biological processes and then taking the Uniprot list of all Gene Ontology proteins (for the human taxonomy) for that particular biological process.
```

- A vector of 0s and 1s is built that indicates whether the particular protein in the ensemble pathway is found in the Gene Ontology list or not. This vector is called `y_go` and is attached to the ensemble pathway dataframe.
    - The `max_freq` column in the dataframe is considered as the probabilities/scores and the `y_go` column in the dataframe is considered as the true label
- Then, a precision recall curve is built.

> 

Reviewer: The data processing in the notebooks is clearly described above. It would also be helpful to have a new readme section for all the raw data files that provides the origin of those files. That could be grouped by data source when multiple files come from one GitHub repository or database.

Author: I have a README file in the hiv_raw_data folder that documents where each file comes from - I haven't grouped that by data source though

Reviewer: Putting the sources in that readme works.

## HIV benchmarking

This folder contains raw data, processed data, and SPRAS results pertaining to the dataset taken from the following research article: **[HIV-1 virological synapse formation enhances infection spread by dysregulating Aurora Kinase B](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1011492)** - Bruce JW, Park E, Magnano C, Horswill M, Richards A, Potts G, et al. (2023)

The study examines human immune cells responding to viral infection as well as the changes that take place inside the already infected cells, which is the focus here.
The data is from protein abundance and phosphorylation experiments, which will be the input to pathway reconstruction.

**Overarching goal:** Recreate published biological case study on HIV data using SPRAS. This will help in identifying nodes i.e. proteins that are relevant to the disease.

> 

Reviewer: Somewhere in the readme note that `requirements.txt` pins the versions of the important packages for data analysis but this assumes the Jupyter notebook environment is already available.
